# Comparison of Genetic Operators for the Multiobjective Pickup and Delivery Problem
 1. Introduction
The pickup and delivery problem is a problem that has gained significant popularity since its inception. Much of its interest is due to strong applications in industry across several important problems such as supply chain routing, distribution, ride hailing, food delivery, etc. [1]. In recent years, in part due to the emergence of COVID-19, these problems have been brought to the forefront of the public consciousness. It has been harder to fulfill the demands of a global population. Supply chains have been hit particularly hard leading to a sharp decrease in the number of goods that have been shipped [2]. The need for robust and efficient solutions is more important than ever.
The pickup and delivery problem is a variation on vehicle routing [3]. Specifically, this paper addresses the multiobjective capacitated pickup and delivery problem (PDP) with time windows. Vehicle routing, in turn, is a generalization of the travelling salesman problem. Vehicle routing expands upon its predecessors by allowing multiple routes and multiple vehicles while still maintaining the goal of minimizing the total distance or time travelled. The pickup and delivery problem further expands on vehicle routing by adding precedence to pairs of nodes, pickup nodes and delivery nodes [3]. Each pickup node must be visited prior to the corresponding delivery node. The added precedence constrains the problem in unique ways such that many algorithms developed for regular vehicle routing must be altered. The added constraints of capacity and time windows further restrict operations on the solution.
The pickup delivery problem also has some additional constraints which are important to this version of the problem. All vehicles start and end at the same location called a depot. The fleet is assumed to have all the vehicles be the same and travel at uniform speeds to simplify the problem. It is assumed that no node is visited twice as the pickup and delivery only needs to be completed once. If a vehicle must travel through a node to arrive at another node, this is simply ignored.
As pickup delivery with time windows is NP-hard [1], there have been many attempts to develop heuristics. One class of heuristics which have had success in solving the multiobjective PDP is genetic algorithms. With the introduction of NSGA-II (Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II) [4], evolutionary algorithms have a strong framework for modelling this kind of problem. Standard techniques to approach multiobjective problems include assigning weights to different objective values or solving them one at a time. The latter essentially turns the problem into a sequential single-objective problem. NSGA-II introduces nondominated sorting which allows solutions to be ranked according to numerous objectives without specifying precedence or weights, by sorting solutions into dominating fronts. Further, a crowding distance allows the comparison between within each front while still avoiding the previous issues. This allows better solutions to propagate without placing bias or preference to any one solution.
The large majority of current research into the pickup and delivery problem is single objective. This is insufficient in practice in many cases. Real-world scenarios are dynamic with many factors such as profit, vehicle count, or greenhouse emissions being factors in determining routes. Even the visual nature of the routes can determine whether a solution will be utilized in practice [5]. The research that does explore multiobjective pickup and delivery often reduces it down into a weighted single-objective problem, adding bias and eliminating diverse solutions [6]. This area of research has also grown with the recent popularity in green vehicle routing. Green vehicle routing often attempts to minimize environmental impacts alongside reducing costs and distance, making it a prime candidate for multiobjective techniques.
To improve upon NSGA-II, mutation and crossover operators can be specified. There are many different mutation and crossover operators that can be utilized for travelling salesman problems and their variants [7].
This paper introduces several local search operators to quantify and compare them. There are two main classifications of operators that are covered: inter-route operations and intraroute operations. As multiple inter-route operations need to be included in order to cover the search space, an ablation study is utilized to explore each operator’s effectiveness. Intraroute operations are compared directly.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the current state of works in the field of multiobjective pickup and delivery. Section 3 formally introduces the problem and supply a linear programming model for the problem. Section 4 introduces the genetic algorithm and explains its properties. Section 5 shows results and finally, Section 6 concludes with a discussion of the results and future directions.
